# RNAwl - Estimate Density of Satates via Wang-Landau sampling

The Wang-Landau algorithm [1],[2] is a Mote Carlo approach for sampling the
Density of States (DOS) of a system via a random walk in energy space. It
has been successfully applied to classical systems like the Ising model or
spin glasses.

This as an implementation of the Wang-Landau algorithm for RNA secondary
structures. RNA-related computation is performed by libRNA (available with
the ViennaRNA Package [3]).

## Usage

A typical command line for running a simulation with 1000 bins and a fixed
bin width of 0.1 (kcal/mol) is

 $ RNAwl --bins 1000 --resolution 0.1 myrna.in

RNAwl expects a single input file containg the nucleotide sequence and a
start structure in dot-bracket notation on separate lines. e.g.:

    CGGCGACUGCCGUAUGAAUCUCUAUGAGCG
    ((((....)))).......(((...)))..

RNAwl -h lists available options and --info gives current (or default)
values for all parameters.

## Output

Two types of output files are generated by default, both of which make use
of the fact that the logarithm of the DOS is used internally. Output files
are identified by extensions .lDoS and .sDoS.

First, the natural logarithm of the currently estimated (relative) DOS is
ouput for each _populated_ energy bin as xy list (exitension *.lDoS) every
time the histogram is 'flat' (and thus reset to zero). x is computed as the
average value of a bin's range (i.e. if a bin goes from E_a to E_b,
x=(E_b-E_a)/2) and y is given as the natural logarithm of the estimated DOS
in the corresponding bin.

Second, the current values of the (scaled) DOS estimation is output every
c*10^(1/4) steps, starting with c=10^6 (extension *.sDoS). Typically,
scaling is performed via the lowest (groundstate) bin, for which the true
DoS can be computed via suboptimal folding from the ViennaRNA library,
i.e. ln[gn(E)] = ln[g(E)]-ln[g(Egs)]+ln[Q] where Q is the number of
structures in the lowest bin. Values are exponentiated before writing them
in order to get effective values for DOS esimates that can readily be
compared with a reference.

## Evaluation of results

To evaluate convergence, we have included a helper script that computes the
relative error of the sampled DOS vs a 'reference' DOS. eval_sampledDOS.pl
is available in the Perl/ folder of the distribution.

## Dependencies

* libgsl [GNU Scientific Library](http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/)
* libRNA2 >=2.2 [ViennaRNA Library](http://www.tbi.univie.ac.at/RNA/index.html)

## Caveats

Histograms are allocated to uniformly cover the sampling range per
default. If you would like to have more fine-grained control over the
histogram layout, you can provide a custom bin width via the --resolution
option. The sampling range will then be computed as <resolution> * <bins>,
i.e. the upper bound of the sampling range is then computed as <mfe> +
<resolution> * <bins>.

## References

  [1]: F. Wang, D.P. Landau "Efficient, Multiple-Range RandomWalk Algorithm
to Calculate the Density of States" Phy. Rev. Lett. 86 10,2001

  [2]: D.P. Landau, Shan-Ho Tsai, M. Exler "A new approach to Monte Carlo
simulations in statistical physics: Wang-Landau sampling"
Am. J. Phys. 72 10, 2004

  [3]: R. Lorenz, S.H. Bernhart, C. Höner zu Siederdissen, H. Tafer,
Ch. Flamm, P.F. Stadler, I.L. Hofacker "ViennaRNA Package 2.0"
Alg. Mol. Biol., 6:1 26, 2011
